Pocket Dimension
================

The Basics
----------

Pocket Dimension provides a memory-efficient, dense, random projection of sparse
vectors from potentially very high dimensions (~2.1 billion) down to much lower
dimension dense vectors (~256). It does this by not storing the entire
(2.1 billion x 256) projection matrix in memory. Instead it calculates only the columns
it needs on the fly based upon the non-zero elements of any given sparse vector. This
function is implemented in Numba to speed things up.

Besides the random projection function, Pocket Dimension comes with two classes that
can create either Term-Frequency or Term-Frequency, Inverse Document Frequency vectors
into dense vectors from starting records.

Usage
-----

::

    import numpy as np
    from pocket_dimension.pocket_dimension import TFVectorizer

    # Make some data. "one" and "two" should be similar & "abc" should be different
    records = [
        {"id": "one", "features": [b"one", b"two", b"three"], "counts": [1, 2, 3]},
        {"id": "two", "features": [b"one", b"two", b"three"], "counts": [2, 3, 4]},
        {"id": "abc", "features": [b"abc", b"cde", b"efghi"], "counts": [9, 1, 3]},
    ]

    # Create the TFVectorizer. Let's project down to 128-d
    embedder = TFVectorizer(128)
    X, ids = embedder(records)

    # let's check cosine similarity
    cosine_one_two = X[0].dot(X[1])
    cosine_one_abc = X[0].dot(X[2])
    print(f"Vectors 'one' and 'two' have cosine similarity = {cosine_one_two:.4f}")
    print(f"Vectors 'one' and 'abc' have cosine similarity = {cosine_one_abc:.4f}")
    # Vectors 'one' and 'two' have cosine similarity = 0.9926
    # Vectors 'one' and 'abc' have cosine similarity = -0.0177

The Details
-----------
Random projection is a dimension reduction technique that has some mathematical
guarantees thanks to the Johnson-Lindenstrauss Lemma, though in practice it is common
to get good results even if you blow past the mathematical guarantees to lower
dimensions. Their are two different implementations within
`scikit-learn.random_projection`, `GaussianRandomProjection` and
`SparseRandomProjection`. The `GaussianRandomProjection` will make a dense projection
matrix which will quickly exhaust RAM if the one dimension is large. The
`SparseRandomProjection` will use a sparse matrix, but many of the values will
necessarily be zero which can affect the quality of the projection. Pocket Dimension
will generate only the needed columns of the projection matrix, but will make entries
for every row in that column.  So it is a combination of the two. Pocket Dimension
leverages a hash function to effectively create random, but repeatable,
:math:`\pm1/\sqrt d` entries which are scaled appropriately to preserve the magnitude
of the vector and :math:`d` is the embedding dimension.

If your vectors are sparse, then it is quick to calculate. The sparser the vector, the
faster the processing.

The Johnson-Lindenstrauss Lemma states that the distance squared between any pair of
vectors after they have been randomly projected down to a smaller dimension will be
within a multiple of :math:`1\pm\epsilon` of the original distance squared.

.. math::

    (1-\epsilon)\lVert \mathbf{u}-\mathbf{v} \rVert ^2 \leq \lVert \mathbf{A}\mathbf{u}-\mathbf{A}\mathbf{v} \rVert ^2 \leq (1+\epsilon)\lVert \mathbf{u}-\mathbf{v} \rVert^2

where :math:`\mathbf{A}` is the random projection matrix.
